          A good prompt needs to be detailed and specific. A good process is to look through a list of keyword categories and
decide whether you want to use any of them. A good prompt is a series of comma separated keywords or small key phrases.
The prompt should not be in the form of sentences, but in the form of indicators which help Stable Diffusion
to select the right samples.

The examples provided are not exhaustive. You should not limit yourself to the examples. Instead, use them to inspire
your own keywords. The listed keywords should not indicate a bias towards those keywords. You should not use them
because they are listed here. You should use whatever keyword is appropriate for what you want to see in the image.


Some categories are:

Subject
The subject is what you want to see in the image. A common mistake is not writing enough about the subjects.

Let’s say we want to generate a sorceress casting magic. A newbie may just write "A sorceress". That leaves too much
room for imagination. Any words describing her that would narrow down her image? What’s the background scene? Stable
Diffusion cannot read our minds. We have to say exactly what we want. A common trick for human subjects is to use
celebrity names. They have a strong effect and are an excellent way to control the subject’s appearance.


Medium
Medium defines a category of the artwork.

Medium is the material used to make artwork. Some examples are illustration, oil painting, 3D rendering, and
photography. Medium has a strong effect because one keyword alone can dramatically change the style.

Examples:
Portrait	Focuses image on the face / headshot.
Digital painting	Digital art style
Concept art	Illustration style, 2D
Ultra realistic illustration	drawing that are very realistic. Good to use with people
Underwater portrait	Use with people. Underwater. Hair floating
Underwater steampunk	underwater with wash color


Style
These keywords further refine the art style.

The style refers to the artistic style of the image. Examples include impressionist, surrealist, pop art, etc.

Examples:
hyperrealistic	Increases details and resolution
pop-art	Pop-art style
Modernist	vibrant color, high contrast
art nouveau	Add ornaments and details, building style


Artist
Mentioning the artist in the prompt is a strong effect. Study their work and choose wisely.

Artist names are strong modifiers. They allow you to dial in the exact style using a particular artist as a reference.
It is also common to use multiple artist names to blend their styles.

Examples:
John Collier	19th century portrait painter. Add elegancy
Stanley Artgerm Lau	Strong realistic modern drawing.
Frida Kahlo	Quite strong effect following Kahlo’s portrait style. Sometimes result in picture frame
John Singer Sargent	Good to use with woman portrait, generate 19th delicate clothings, some impressionism
Alphonse Mucha	2D portrait painting in style of Alphonse Mucha


Website
Mentioning an art or photo site is a strong effect, probably because each site has its niche genre.

Examples:
pixiv	Japanese anime style
pixabay	Commercial stock photo style
artstation	Modern illustration, fantasy


Resolution

Resolution represents how sharp and detailed the image is.

Examples:
unreal engine	Very realistic and detailed 3D
sharp focus	Increase resolution
8k	Increase resolution, though can lead to it looking more fake. Makes the image more camera like and realistic
vray	3D rendering best for objects, landscape and building.


Additional details
Add specific details to your image.

Additional details are sweeteners added to modify an image. We will add sci-fi, stunningly beautiful and dystopian to
add some vibe to the image.

Examples:
dramatic	Increases the emotional expressivity of the face. Overall substantial increase in photo potential / variability. +1 for variability, important for getting the max hit.
silk	Add silk to clothing
expansive	More open background, smaller subject
low angle shot	shot from low angle **
god rays	sunlight breaking through the cloud
psychedelic	vivid color with distortion


Color
Add additional color scheme to the image.

You can control the overall color of the image by adding color keywords. The colors you specified may appear as a
tone or in objects.

Examples:
iridescent gold	Shinny gold
silver	Silver color
vintage	vintage effect
sepia	sepia effect


Lighting

Any photographer would tell you lighting is a key factor in creating successful images. Lighting keywords can have
a huge effect on how the image looks. Let’s add cinematic lighting and dark to the prompt.

Examples:
cinematic lighting	Strong lighting effect
dark	Make the image darker
light	Make the image lighter
backlit	Light from behind


You don’t have to include keywords from all categories. Treat them as a checklist to remind you what could be used.


Limiting the variation

To be good at building prompts, you need to think like Stable Diffusion. At its core, it is an image sampler,
generating pixel values that we humans likely say it’s legit and good. You can even use it without prompts, and it
would generate many unrelated images. In technical terms, this is called unconditioned or unguided diffusion.

The prompt is a way to guide the diffusion process to the sampling space where it matches. I said earlier that a prompt
needs to be detailed and specific. It’s because a detailed prompt narrows down the sampling space.


Attribute association

Some attributes are strongly correlated. When you specify one, you will get the other. Stable Diffusion generates
the most likely images that could have an unintended association effect.

Let’s say we want to generate photos of women with blue eyes.

Example prompt:
a young female with blue eyes, highlights in hair, sitting outside restaurant, wearing a white outfit, side light

What if we change to brown eyes?

Example prompt:
a young female with brown eyes, highlights in hair, sitting outside restaurant, wearing a white outfit, side light

Nowhere in the prompts, I specified ethnicity. But because people with blue eyes are predominantly Europeans,
Caucasians were generated. Brown eyes are more common across different ethnicities, so you will see a more diverse
sample of races.


Association of celebrity names

Every keyword has some unintended associations. That’s especially true for celebrity names. Some actors and actresses
like to be in certain poses or wear certain outfits when taking pictures, and hence in the training data. If you think
about it, model training is nothing but learning by association. If Taylor Swift (in the training data) always crosses
her legs, the model would think leg crossing is Taylor Swift too.

Example prompt:
full body taylor swift in future high tech dystopian city, digital painting

When you use Taylor Swift in the prompt, you may mean to use her face. But there’s an effect of the subject’s pose
and outfit too. The effect can be studied by using her name alone as the prompt.

Poses and outfits are global compositions. If you want her face but not her poses, you can use keyword blending to
swap her in at a later sampling step.


Association of artist names

Perhaps the most prominent example of association is seen when using artist names.

The 19th-century Czech painter Alphonse Mucha is a popular occurrence in portrait prompts because the name helps
generate interesting embellishments, and his style blends very well with digital illustrations. But it also often
leaves a signature circular or dome-shaped pattern in the background. They could look unnatural in outdoor settings.


Embeddings are keywords

Embeddings, the result of textual inversion, are nothing but combinations of keywords. You can expect them to do a
bit more than what they claim.

Let’s see the following base images of Ironman making a meal without using embeddings.

Example prompt:
iron man cooking in kitchen.

Style-Empire is an embedding I like to use because it adds a dark tone to portrait images and creates an interesting
lighting effect. Since it was trained on an image with a street scene at night, you can expect it adds some blacks AND
perhaps buildings and streets. See the images below with the embedding added.

Example prompt:
iron man cooking in kitchen Style-Empire.

Note some interesting effects

The background of the first image changed to city buildings at night.
Iron man tends to show his face. Perhaps the training image is a portrait?
So even if an embedding is intended to modify the style, it is just a bunch of keywords and can have unintended effects.


Prompting techniques

You can modify a keyword’s importance by switching to a different one at a certain sampling step.

Keyword weight
(This syntax applies to AUTOMATIC1111 GUI.)

You can adjust the weight of a keyword by the syntax (keyword: factor). factor is a value such that less than 1 means
less important and larger than 1 means more important.

For example, we can adjust the weight of the keyword dog in the following prompt

Example prompt:
dog, autumn in paris, ornate, beautiful, atmosphere, vibe, mist, smoke, fire, chimney, rain, wet, pristine, puddles,
melting, dripping, snow, creek, lush, ice, bridge, forest, roses, flowers, by stanley artgerm lau, greg rutkowski,
thomas kindkade, alphonse mucha, loish, norman rockwell.

Increasing the weight of dog tends to generate more dogs. Decreasing it tends to generate fewer. It is not always true
for every single image. But it is true in a statistical sense.

This technique can be applied to subject keywords and all categories, such as style and lighting.

() and [] syntax

An equivalent way to adjust keyword strength is to use () and []. (keyword) increases the strength of the keyword by a
factor of 1.1 and is the same as (keyword:1.1). [keyword] decrease the strength by a factor of 0.9 and is the same as
(keyword:0.9).

You can use multiple of them, just like in Algebra… The effect is multiplicative.

(keyword): 1.1
((keyword)): 1.21
(((keyword))): 1.33


Similarly, the effects of using multiple [] are

[keyword]: 0.9
[[keyword]]: 0.81
[[[keyword]]]: 0.73


Keyword blending

You can mix two keywords. The proper term is prompt scheduling. The syntax is

[keyword1 : keyword2: factor]


factor controls at which step keyword1 is switched to keyword2. It is a number between 0 and 1.

For example, if I use the prompt

Oil painting portrait of [Joe Biden: Donald Trump: 0.5]


for 30 sampling steps.

That means the prompt in steps 1 to 15 is

Oil painting portrait of Joe Biden


And the prompt in steps 16 to 30 becomes

Oil painting portrait of Donald Trump


The factor determines when the keyword is changed. it is after 30 steps x 0.5 = 15 steps.

The effect of changing the factor is blending the two presidents to different degrees.

You may have noticed Trump is in a white suit which is more of a Joe outfit. This is a perfect example of a very
important rule for keyword blending: The first keyword dictates the global composition. The early diffusion steps
set the overall composition. The later steps refine details.

Blending faces
A common use case is to create a new face with a particular look, borrowing from actors and actresses. For example,
[Emma Watson: Amber heard: 0.85], 40 steps is a look between the two.

When carefully choosing the two names and adjusting the factor, we can get the look we want precisely.


How long can a prompt be?

Depending on what Stable Diffusion service you are using, there could be a maximum number of keywords you can use in
the prompt. In the basic Stable Diffusion v1 model, that limit is 75 tokens.

Note that tokens are not the same as words. The CLIP model Stable Diffusion uses automatically converts the prompt into
tokens, a numerical representation of words it knows. If you put in a word it has not seen before, it will be broken up
into 2 or more sub-words until it knows what it is. The words it knows are called tokens, which are represented as
numbers. For example, dream is one token, beach is one token. But dreambeach are two tokens because the model doesn't
know this word, and so the model breaks the word up to dream and beach which it knows.


Negative prompt

Using negative prompts is another great way to steer the image, but instead of putting in what you want, you put in
what you don’t want. They don’t need to be objects. They can also be styles and unwanted
attributes. (e.g. ugly, deformed)

Using negative prompts is a must for v2 models. Without it, the images would look far inferior to v1’s. They are
optional for v1 models, but I routinely use them because they either help or don’t hurt.

I will use a universal negative prompt. You can read more about it if you want to understand how it works.

Example negative prompt:
ugly, tiling, poorly drawn hands, poorly drawn feet, poorly drawn face, out of frame, extra limbs, disfigured,
deformed, body out of frame, bad anatomy, watermark, signature, cut off, low contrast, underexposed, overexposed,
bad art, beginner, amateur, distorted face, blurry, draft, grainy

The negative prompt is special as it must be returned as the 'negative_prompt' parameter. It is not part of the
'prompt' parameter.